Welcome to Introduction to Polynomial and Nonlinear Regression.
After watching this video, you will be able to
Describe polynomial regression, describe nonlinear regression,
and demonstrate applications of nonlinear regression.
Nonlinear regression is a statistical method for
modeling the relationship between a dependent
variable and one or more independent variables,
where the relationship is represented by a
nonlinear equation.
This equation could be polynomial, exponential,
logarithmic, or any other function that does
not use linear parameters.
Nonlinear regression is useful when there is a
complex relationship between variables
that cannot be captured through a straight line.
For instance, you would use nonlinear regression
when you are using a dataset that follows
an exponential growth pattern.
Let's consider the two charts here.
The red line through the data in the left chart
is a reasonable fit.
However, with real-world data, the relationship
between your input and target variables is
rarely linear.
More commonly, your data has a background
trend that follows a smoothed curve rather
than a straight line.
Like in the right chart, clearly a smooth
nonlinear curve does a better job at approximating
data than the straight line.
The straight line underfits the data.
You can use many kinds of nonlinear
regression methods to model your dataset.
Polynomial regression uses an ordinary
linear regression to indirectly fit your data to
polynomial expressions of the features,
rather than the features themselves.
Nonlinear regression follows the same idea,
but bases its inputs on functions of the given
features, such as the logarithm or exponential of the features.
Nonlinear regression doesn't necessarily
reduce to linear regression like polynomial
regression does.
In this chart, you can see linear, quadratic,
and cubic regression curves that fit the patterns
in the data quite well.
And this approach can go on and on to polynomials of arbitrary degree.
We can call all of these polynomial regression,
where the relationship between the independent
variable x and the dependent variable y is
modeled as an nth degree polynomial in x.
Consider this polynomial regression example
where a good candidate for a fit is a cubic
or third degree polynomial, given by
y equals theta zero plus theta one x plus
theta two x squared plus theta three x cubed.
Here, the thetas are parameters to be estimated
that best fit the underlying data, by introducing
new variables as x underscore one equals x,
x underscore two equals x to the power of
two, and x underscore three equals x to the power of three.
The model can now be expressed as a linear
combination of the new variables as
y equals theta zero plus theta one x one plus
theta two x two plus theta three x three.
Because the resulting model has been linearized,
you can simply use ordinary multiple linear
regression to find the best fit parameters.
Given any finite sets of points, it's always
possible to find a polynomial of sufficiently
high degree that will pass through every point.
Such a perfect fit amounts to overfitting as seen in this chart.
The polynomial regression model memorizes
everything including any random noise or
large variations, rather than understanding the underlying patterns.
It's important to pick a regression that
fits the data well without overfitting.
You don't need to capture every fine detail,
just the trend.
Polynomial regression is a special form of nonlinear regression.
It expresses a nonlinear dependence on the
input features, but it has a linear dependence
on the regression coefficients because it
can be transformed into a linear regression
problem.
It is often simply called linear regression.
In contrast, there are many real-world complex
nonlinear relationships that can't be modeled
as polynomials.
Such common examples of nonlinear regression
include exponential or compound growth.
For example, how investments grow with compound interest rates.
Logarithmic.
For example, law of diminishing returns,
how incremental gains in productivity or profit
can reduce as investment in a production factor,
such as labor increases.
Periodicity.
For example, sinusoidal seasonal variations
in a quantity, such as monthly rainfall or temperature.
Let's consider this data corresponding to
China's Gross Domestic Product, or GDP,
from 1960 to 2014.
Each row provides China's annual GDP in US dollars for the year.
The scatter plot displays a strong dependence
of GDP on time, but the relationship is nonlinear.
As you can see, GDP increases over time,
and the rate of this growth also increases.
This increasing growth rate is characteristic of exponential growth.
A reasonable regression model then uses an
exponential function, like y-hat equals theta-zero
plus theta-one, e-x.
Consider the following simulated example involving
human productivity as a function of the number
of consecutive hours worked.
Working more hours per day, on average,
increases your productivity.
However, after a reasonable limit, say 6 hours of work,
each additional work hour generates
less productivity per hour than the previous hour.
This is an example of diminishing returns.
The first 6 hours of the model show a linear
increase in cumulative productivity, but then,
the returns slow down and become logarithmic.
There are many methods to determine what kind of regression model you need.
One technique is to visually determine
whether the relation is linear or nonlinear.
Analyzing scatter plots of your target variable
against each input variable can reveal patterns
in the dependencies.
Try to express these patterns as mathematical
functions and determine if they're linear,
exponential, logarithmic, or sinusoidal.
Generate models and analyze your results.
There is always a chance that your data might
have no relationship with your target.
You can visually interpret your model's
errors by plotting its predictions against
the actual target values.
How can you find an optimal nonlinear model?
If you have a mathematical expression for your
proposed model, you can use an optimization
technique like gradient descent to find optimal parameters.
Otherwise, if you haven't decided on a specific
regression model, you can select amongst many
machine learning models.
Some options include regression trees, random forests,
neural networks, support vector machines,
gradient boosting machines, k-nearest neighbors.
Nonlinear regression uses polynomial, exponential,
logarithmic equations to model data.
It is used when the relationship between variables
cannot be captured through a straight line.
In this video, you learned how you can use
polynomial regression to fit your data to
polynomial expressions of the features.
The polynomial regression model memorizes everything,
including any random noise or
large variations, rather than understanding the underlying patterns.
There are many real-world complex nonlinear
relationships that can't be modeled as polynomials.
Some common examples of nonlinear regression
include exponential or compound growth, logarithmic,
and periodicity.
There are many methods to determine what
kind of regression model you need.
You can analyze scatter plots of your target
variable against each input variable to reveal
patterns in the dependencies.
To find an optimal nonlinear model, you can
select amongst many machine learning models
such as regression trees, random forests,
and k-nearest neighbors.